---
title: History
main:
  fluid: true
---

## Summary

*Beliefs about Jesus separate Christians from everyone else. Jesus was a
specific person, born of a woman, executed under a specific Roman
governor. Unlike mythological deities, he did not come from the distant
and hazy past --- he interacted with the real world. He had a real body
that was born, crucified and buried, and yet he was divine, too ---
conceived by the Holy Spirit, resurrected, ascended into heaven at a
position of supreme power. He is the unique Son of God, a unique Lord
who is above all earthly lords, and he is the Judge who will return to
earth to determine everyone's reward.*

### Origins

*There is no evidence that the creed was written by the apostles or Paul
himself; While what is stated in the creed is not found verbatum in Holy
scriptures, the creed is most certainly scriptural. It's debatable, but
the Apostles\' Creed probably developed mostly between the 2nd and the
3th centuries starting with some written accounts around 200. The first
copy of the Apostles' Creed pops up around 340, before the NT was
cannonized. The text can be traced back earlier to the Old Roman Creed,
which is referenced by some of the early Church Fathers. In 650,
Augustine, a bishop in North Africa, reports that the Apostles' Creed is
standard. Safe to say, 400-500 year time period of total development.*

### Authority

*Historically, the Apostles' Creed is believed to be in full agreement
with the apostolic writings, and the same churches have historically
accepted both the Creed and the Scriptures as authoritative, as faithful
reports of what the apostles taught. Numerous scriptures could be
mentioned as support for the various points of the Creed, to wit, the
second purpose of this paper; To provide an exegesis in terms of
specfically, which scripture(s), and what they have to say, specifically
for each part of the total twelve parts of the entire creed.*

### Historical Relevance

*The Apostles' Creed begins with a simple statement of faith in God, who
has all power and is the originator of everything. The Apostles Creed
expresses our belief in the Trinity: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The
Apostles' Creed is not the Nicene Creed. The Nicene Creed is a rejection
of pagan mythologies and it was acceptable to Jews and to some of the
more educated Greeks. The word creed comes from the Latin word
\"credo,\" which means believe. We begin a statement of our Christian
beliefs with the word \"credo\" or \"I believe...\" There were a number
of types baptisimal creeds during the second century (during the time of
persecution, after the apostles, but before the conversion of
Constantine). Baptisimal Creeds were used for educational purposes, like
a call and response, stated, Christian, what do you believe? The
Christian would then respond to the call, afirming the Church\'s beliefs
about the one God who is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. A baptisimal
creed is a statement of faith that Chritians, affirm, accepting the
Triune God is an essential part of baptism from the very beginning of
the church.*

### Nicene Creed
*The Apostles Creed includes two phrases that are not found in the Nicene Creed.*
- First, \"He descended into hell\"
- Second, \"the communion of saints\"

## Themes

*Most of the Creed is about **Jesus Christ**, the person of, and the
defining, and definitive doctrine for, the Christian faith, entirely. It
is also about the **Trinue God**. Two additional themes that are
presented include first, the communion of saints, which refers to the
holy men and women in heaven who remain united with us through the
Church, and secondly, the active participation of the Christian in the
crucificition theme, specifically referring to the time in between
Jesus\'s death and resurrection when he welcomed all righteous souls
into salvation. Additionally, in terms of His death, **decent** into
hell, and **ressuruction** on the third day, describes specifically the
mechanics of how salvation works and how we are saved and actually come
to have newness of life thru being buried with Him in baptism into
death.*

### Trinue God

**The Trinitarian belief originates in Jesus\'s Great Commission of the
Apostles in Matthew 28 to baptize in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Spirit.**

**Mat 28** In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the
first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the
sepulchre. 2 And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of
the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from
the door, and sat upon it. 3 His countenance was like lightning, and his
raiment white as snow: 4 And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and
became as dead men. 5 And the angel answered and said unto the women,
Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. 6 He is
not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the
Lord lay. 7 And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from
the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye
see him: lo, I have told you. 8 And they departed quickly from the
sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples
word. 9 And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them,
saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped
him. 10 Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren
that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me. 11 Now when they
were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and shewed
unto the chief priests all the things that were done. 12 And when they
were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large
money unto the soldiers, 13 Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night,
and stole him away while we slept. 14 And if this come to the
governor\'s ears, we will persuade him, and secure you. 15 So they took
the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is commonly
reported among the Jews until this day. 16 Then the eleven disciples
went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.
17 And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted. 18 And
Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth. 19 Go ye therefore, and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: 20 Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the
world. Amen.

### Descent into Hell

### Communion of Saints

## Sources 

- Since You Asked Podcast - Jim Berrier (CGM Radio)

- The Apostles' Creed - Grace Communion International

- Constantine the Great and Christianity - Wikipedia

- The Apostles Creed vs. Nicene Creed -- The Religion Teacher (YouTube)

- Mere Christianity -- C.S. Lewis

- Merriam Webster Dictionary, 2022

- Martin Luther

- The Dates of Easter Sunday -- Panos Antsaklis, Notre Dame, Indiana

- Wikipedia, 2022

**V0.9.1**

*This paper presents the historic statement of beliefs that is the
Apostles' Creed, and its biblical influence, one of each the twelve
sections at a time. The creed is a brief, but complete, foundational
resource that is well established across both Old Testament and New
Testament narratives. The creed is a well-rounded representation of the
Christian faith.*

Maintainer: <a href="https://github.com/mhackersu" target="_blank">@mhackersu</a>
